Decoding Underlying Behaviour from Destructive Time Series Experiments
through Gaussian Process Models

A major problem for biological time series is that often experiments
(such as gene expression measurements using microarrays or RNA-seq)
require the organism or cells to be destroyed. This means that a
particular time series is often a series of measurements of different
organisms (or batches of cells) at different times. Biological
replicates normally consist of a separate biological sample measured
at the same time. With the advent of single cell expression
experiments, where it is not currently conceivable to make genome-wide
gene expression measurements without destroying the cell, we expect
such set ups to be sustained.

Many existing approaches to modelling transcriptional data postulate a
differential equation model for continuous-time expression profiles
from which the repeated observations arise.  Two ways of modelling
repeat experiments would be either to handle repeated observations as
being from a shared profile, or from completely independent profiles.
The former approach assumes that gene expression profile for each
experiment does not vary, whilst the latter approach assumes no
relationship between the gene expression profiles. For many
experimental set ups we might expect something in between these two
extremes where, whilst each individual measurement comes from a
different collection of cells or a different organism, the
experimental set up is broadly the same. We therefore expect some
shared affects and some independent affects for the experiments.

In this work we propose an integrated Gaussian process framework for
analysis of such experiments.  In our approach, independent aspects of
the experiments are modelled as independent Gaussian process draws,
while the common profile across the experiments is modelled by a
separate Gaussian process.  The method adds power through sharing of
replicates for the common profile while being robust to outliers from
individual rogue experiments.
