ReviewerID: 9880   	4 	7
Comments to author(s)
the goal of the paper seems to be to reproduce 15
parameters (describing the influence of p53 on
5 targets) estimated by another theory paper. I have
read many papers in computational biology, whose
goals are usually either (i) to reproduce data
by over-fitting, (ii) to reproduce data and show good generalization (that
is, to validate statistically without over-fitting),
(iii) to find interactions for which there is support
in the literature, or (iv) to suggest an experiment.

This paper introduces something else entirely: trying
to attain agreement with a similar computational paper.
The authors are so removed from the data that they
do not even cite the experimental paper, nor describe
the experiment, referring to the dataset as "the dataset
studied in [other theory paper]".

While it might have been innovative to apply massive
Gaussian processes to alleged models of gene regulation
in 2002 or so, I don't think this paper is innovating
advances in machine learning nor in biology. There is
no evidence that they are not simply building an
overly-complex model with an excessive number of free
parameters. The validation is based on agreement with
another, recent theory paper, whose validity, rather than
the underlying biological data, or appeals to biological
literature, is taken as the gold standard.

I encourage the authors to show that they have agreement
with the raw biological data, without over-fitting these
data, and that the hidden variables have biological meaning
with support from biological literature. In the absence
of any of these, this is an exercise of mathematical ideas
from a textbook (literally), without advancing biology or
machine learning.

small technical points:

* what are w and b used in eqn 18? how are they set?

* isn't it easier to use the logarithm of the positive
quantities as the raw data "x", which then allows negative
terms in the Gaussian process, rather than doing this nonlinear
transform?


Summary of review
underwhelming in terms of computational biology: attempts to fit someone else's theory; little attention to 'motivating' experiment or data


You may optionally submit feedback that will be visible to the reviewers and PC members. The length of your feedback is limited to 250 words (including spaces and special characters).
Please enter your arguments here: 	

Back 	

bild
	Criterion01	Criterion02
 ReviewerID: 604   	9 	9
Comments to author(s)
This paper proposes a Gaussian process model for latent transcription factor (TF) concentration, and provides an elegant solution for posterior inference on the TF concentration given mRNA time series under basic linear response assumption and a more complicated nonlinear response assumption.

This paper should be viewed by bioinformaticists as a methodological foundation paper, because indeed the assumptions used in the paper are still a big step away from the real scenarios in a biological system. But the formalisms introduced here have the potential to eventually address more realistic cases.

Overall I thoroughly enjoy reading the paper. I did not check all the functional analysis details of the derivations, but I expect that a later full version of this paper will be able to provide this, as for general users who are not fluent with functional analysis, detailed derivations will be helpful for them to digest and master this technique.

I found no major problem with the technique part. And due to its methodological nature, the experimental design appears appropriate. I’d like to see a little more elaboration on why the estimation for the base level (fig 2a) is very different for Gsussian process and Barenco’s methods.

I concur with some of the points raised in the discussion, and am a little skeptical about the practical applicability of this model. 1) The sampling interval in current microarray experiments may not fully capture the regulatory dynamics between TF and transcripts. 2) Generalizing this technique to model multi-fan-in regulation, and logical interactions between TFs in regulating downstream genes may be quite difficult.

Overall, this paper is solid, well written, and very refreshing.


Summary of review
This paper proposes a Gaussian process model for latent transcription factor (TF) concentration, and provides an elegant solution for posterior inference on the TF concentration given mRNA time series under basic linear response assumption and a more complicated nonlinear response assumption.


You may optionally submit feedback that will be visible to the reviewers and PC members. The length of your feedback is limited to 250 words (including spaces and special characters).
Please enter your arguments here: 	

Back 	

bild
	Criterion01	Criterion02
 ReviewerID: 2177   	8 	8
Comments to author(s)
Barenco et al employed a linear differential equation describing the rate of
change of mRNA abundance in relation to the concentration of a single
transcription factor (protein) TFc. An MCMC procedure was employed to obtain the posterior over all parameters (decay rates etc) and discrete values of TF concentration (at each data sample time point - interpolation of some form being employed).

In this paper the authors take the same linear model and rather than
discretising the TFc as in Barenco a GP functional prior is placed on the
overall TFc profile. This is an elegant alternative solution to the somewhat
clunky interpolation employed by Barenco. So following a Bayesian strategy it
seems that the conditional distribution of the TFc profile is also a GP and
so the MCMC procedure of Barenco could be simplified to a Gibbs-Metropolis
scheme - or as the authors prefer - take determinsitic steps by employing the
conditional mean (no sampling form the GP conditional) and then plugging into the Metropolis scheme for the various rate parameters.

Of course the parameters and TFc's have positivty constraints and as such the nice linear GP solution employed in the first section is really not
appropriate for any serious modelling purposes and the authors then propose a non-linear response model where a nonlinearly transformed unconstrained r.v with a GP functional prior is employed thus side-stepping the issues of enforcing positivity. Of course now the lovely linear analysis dissapears and some approximations now require to be made and the one suggested by the authors is the MAP. So now instead of a closed form determinsitic step a series of Newton step is now required to obtain the MAP solution. Metropolis sampling of the rate parameters is still employed.

The experimental section shows that reasonable results are obtained and it is interesting to observe the effect that the covariance function has on the overal inferred TFc response. The parameters estimated are concordant with
those reported in Barenco but this is unsurprising as both methods have
employed a Metropolis sampling scheme - only differing in the form and prior placed on the TFc profile.

What advantages does this approach have over the Barenco solution? well
clearly adopting an appropriate functional prior over the TFc profile is a
much more appropriate prior assumption than assuming some quadratic
interpolant.

There seems to be 7 data points available so I assume that there would be at
least 7 point values + interpolant values/parameters that would have to be
infered in the Barenco approach whereas here there will be the 7 values of
the GP functional + any hyperparameters associated with the covariance
function. So if we consider the non-linear response model which is the one
which would be used in any actual modelling I wonder what computational
advantage there is in reality between an integrated Newton routine followed
by Metropolis sampling and Metropolis sampling (included the TFc's)? perhaps the number of samples required for convergence? it would have been useful to really assess this objectively.

Laying aside any questions of computational efficiency the next question is the use of a MAP approximation in a small sample regime relative to the number of data samples - it would have been useful to compare the predictive posteriors for TFc obtained by the suggested MAP scheme and those obtained from a full posterior sampler (employing the GP functional prior) - to give some comfort at least in assessing the the 'credibility' of the posterior predicitive distributions.

It would also have been really useful if a toy example had been given in terms of assessing the quality of the approximation.



Summary of review
In summary this paper suggests an elegant solution to part of the problem of modelling transcriptional regulation - it is novel to propose a functional prior on the TFc's. The paper is clearly written and will certainly motivate further research investigation in this area - it is a good and novel application of GP's within the ML community.


You may optionally submit feedback that will be visible to the reviewers and PC members. The length of your feedback is limited to 250 words (including spaces and special characters).
Please enter your arguments here: 	

Back 	

bild
	Criterion01	Criterion02
 ReviewerID: 126   	7 	5
Comments to author(s)
This paper presents a model for transcriptional regulation of several genes by one transcription factor (TF). The concentration of the relevant TF molecules is modelled as a Gaussian process (GP). When the expression levels of the genes are modelled as being linear functions of the TF concentration, they are also GPs and can be computed analytically. For a non-linear response model, gradient and Hessian are derived, allowing for Newton optimization. In both cases, ML type II can be used to infer model parameters (e.g. decay rates and response sensitivities). Both models are applied to the TF p53 and five target genes. The resulting predictions are compared to those of a previously published method.

Clarity: The paper is very well written and, in principle, easy to follow. A detailed understanding of how the equations are derived does require the reader to be familiar with GPs, though. For readers not familiar with ML type II, it might be nice to briefly outline how this works. Except for very few details (see questions below), the work should be completely reproducable based on this paper.

Quality: The proposed model seems to be reasonable from a biological point of view. For several of the equations, this reviewer can only check them heuristically and by applying common sence. He believes that they are correct, but he cannot be sure. The results lack a validation: they are only compared to the results of another computational model, not to any ground truth. Thus it is not really possible to assess the quality of the results and the usefulness of the model in real applications.

Originality: According to the authors and also to a quick literature search on the web, modelling transcriptional regulation directly by GPs seems to be a novel approach.

Significance: This work is interesting from a machine learning point of view (extending the range of applications of GPs) and useful from an application point of view (allowing for tractable inference, at least for the linear response model).

My main concern with this paper is the lack of empirical evaluation. Is there no useful ground truth data available? If so, the authors might argue that their proposed method approximates the cited method from the literature but offers computational advantages. In this case, the similarity of the results and the computational savings should be quantified, and the theoretical reasoning about advantages and shortcomings of both models should be compared.

Open questions:
1. How are the values of \sigma_{ij}^2 set in the experiments?
2. Which covariance fct is used in figure 2?


Summary of review
The paper is well written and describes an interesting method that sounds reasonable from a biological point of view. However, the approach lacks an empirical evaluation showing that the method really excels..


You may optionally submit feedback that will be visible to the reviewers and PC members. The length of your feedback is limited to 250 words (including spaces and special characters).